Staging for platforms whitepaper v1.1 update (#77)
Cloud-Native-Platform-Engineering/cnpe-community: platforms-whitepaper/latest/index.md

## Introduction

> Platform engineering has emerged as a necessary optimisation for enterprises that experienced the value of autonomous teams with the emergence of DevOps, but want to reduce the costs, security risks, and inefficiencies that came with that autonomy.

Reviewer: I noticed we already use "optimizes" elsewhere in the document. How about we standardize on "optimization" here for consistency?

```suggestion
Platform engineering has emerged as a necessary optimization for enterprises that experienced the value of autonomous teams with the emergence of DevOps, but want to reduce the costs, security risks, and inefficiencies that came with that autonomy.
```

Platforms curate and present foundational capabilities, frameworks, and experiences to facilitate and accelerate the work of internal customers such as application developers, data scientists, and information workers.

> Most importantly, platforms help enterprises realize the cloud native values of fast product releases, portability across infrastructure's, and greater developer productivity across their entire technology estate.

Reviewer: Minor typo here. The plural form of "infrastructure" shouldn't have an apostrophe.

```suggestion
Most importantly, platforms help enterprises realize the cloud native values of fast product releases, portability across infrastructures, and greater developer productivity across their entire technology estate.
```

## Why platforms?

Platforms and platform engineering are popular topics in today's cloud computing world.
Before diving into definitions, techniques, and measurements for platform building, it is important to explore the value platforms provide that's driving this well-deserved attention.

> Process improvements over the past 2-3 decades have significantly increased the agility of software application and product teams, offering them flexible services for both infrastructure like compute, network and storage as well as developer services like builds, tests, delivery and observability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before diving into definitions, techniques, and measurements for platform building, it is important to explore the value platforms provide that's driving this well-deserved attention.

Process improvements over the past 2-3 decades have significantly increased the agility of software application and product teams by offering flexible infrastructure services (such as compute, network and storage) as well as developer services (such as builds, tests, delivery and observability).
```

> The emergence of DevOps practices brought autonomy and process improvement, but it also had the effect of shifting more and more responsibility for supporting services to product teams, thereby forcing them to spend more and more time and cognitive energy on infrastructure concerns and reducing their time to produce value relevant to their organization.

Reviewer 2: Removed repeated "more and more"
```suggestion
The emergence of DevOps practices brought autonomy and process improvement, but it also had the effect of shifting more responsibility for supporting services to product teams, thereby forcing them to spend more time and cognitive energy on infrastructure concerns and reducing their time to produce value relevant to their organization.
```

In addition, the duplication of operations across teams increases risk due to sprawling implementations and unclear ownership models.

> The desire to refocus delivery teams on their core mission and reduce duplication of effort across the organisation has motivated enterprises to implement platforms for cloud-native computing. By investing in platforms, enterprises can:

Reviewer: I noticed we already use "organization" elsewhere in the document. How about we standardize on "organization" here for consistency?

```suggestion
The desire to refocus delivery teams on their core mission and reduce duplication of effort across the organization has motivated enterprises to implement platforms for cloud-native computing. By investing in platforms, enterprises can:
```

The shared platform patterns also allow embedding governance and controls in on-demand services, patterns and capabilities.
Finally, because platform teams corral providers and provide consistent experiences over their offerings, they enable efficient use of infrastructure and service providers for foundational but undifferentiated capabilities such as databases, identity access, infrastructure operations, and app lifecycle.
By decoupling the underlying implementations from the provided capabilities, a platform also introduces the flexibility to change tools and vendors while maintaining a consistent interface and experience for users.

## What is a platform

A cloud-native computing platform is an integrated collection of capabilities defined and presented to meet the needs of its users.
It is a cross-cutting layer that ensures a consistent experience for acquiring and integrating typical capabilities and services for a broad set of applications and use cases.
A good platform provides a consistent, opinionated user experience for using and managing its capabilities and services, such as Web portals, project templates, and self-service APIs.

> According to Atlassian [[1]], "platform teams create capabilities that can be used by numerous stream-aligned [product] teams with little overhead... platform teams minimize resources and cognitive load of the stream-aligned [product] team… platform teams can create a cohesive experience that spans across different user experiences or products."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
According to Atlassian [[1]], "platform teams create capabilities that can be used by numerous stream-aligned [product] teams with little overhead... platform teams minimize resources and cognitive load of the stream-aligned [product] team... platform teams can create a cohesive experience that spans across different user experiences or products."
```

The shared platform patterns also allow embedding governance and controls in on-demand services, patterns and capabilities.
Finally, because platform teams corral providers and provide consistent experiences over their offerings, they enable efficient use of infrastructure and service providers for foundational but undifferentiated capabilities such as databases, identity access, infrastructure operations, and app lifecycle.
By decoupling the underlying implementations from the provided capabilities, a platform also introduces the flexibility to change tools and vendors while maintaining a consistent interface and experience for users.

## What is a platform

A cloud-native computing platform is an integrated collection of capabilities defined and presented to meet the needs of its users.
It is a cross-cutting layer that ensures a consistent experience for acquiring and integrating typical capabilities and services for a broad set of applications and use cases.
A good platform provides a consistent, opinionated user experience for using and managing its capabilities and services, such as Web portals, project templates, and self-service APIs.

> According to Atlassian [[1]], "platform teams create capabilities that can be used by numerous stream-aligned [product] teams with little overhead.... platform teams minimize resources and cognitive load of the stream-aligned [product] team… platform teams can create a cohesive experience that spans across different user experiences or products."

Reviewer 4: Extra dot here.

```suggestion
According to Atlassian [[1]], "platform teams create capabilities that can be used by numerous stream-aligned [product] teams with little overhead... platform teams minimize resources and cognitive load of the stream-aligned [product] team… platform teams can create a cohesive experience that spans across different user experiences or products."
```

In cloud-like environments, applications often externalize a lot of their architecture.
This requires resources and capabilities that are often managed independently and integrated with custom business components; such resources may include databases and object stores, message queues and brokers, observability collectors and dashboards, user directories and authentication systems, task runners and reconcilers and more.
An internal platform provides these to enterprise teams in ways that make them easy to integrate in their applications and systems.

### Platform maturity

At their most basic, internal platforms provide consistent experiences for acquiring and using individual capabilities such as a pipeline runner, a database system, or a secret store.
As they mature, internal platforms also offer _compositions_ of these capabilities as self-serviceable assets for key scenarios like web application development or data analysis.

Use cases that an enterprise could meet with platforms might progress through the following:

1. **Provisional \-** Capabilities are built out of necessity by temporary or voluntary staff, leading to erratic adoption, ad hoc operations, and measurement.

> 1. **Operationalized \-** A dedicated, budgeted team provides common capabilities, often reactively, with adoption driven by external mandates or incentives, and operations are centrally tracked.

Reviewer 2: As per the [current maturity model](https://cloudnativeplatforms.com/whitepapers/platform-eng-maturity-model/), this stage is called 'Operational' right? Not sure if that is being reworded as part of the Maturity model update initiative.
```suggestion
1. **Operational \-** A dedicated, budgeted team provides common capabilities, often reactively, with adoption driven by external mandates or incentives, and operations are centrally tracked.
```

1. **Optimizing \-** The platform becomes an "Enabled Ecosystem" focused on organization-wide efficiency, where core maintainers prioritize enabling specialists to extend capabilities, and adoption is participatory.

For a more detailed vision of platform maturity, please refer to the [Platform Engineering Maturity Model](https://cloudnativeplatforms.com/whitepapers/platform-eng-maturity-model/).

## Attributes of platforms

After defining what a platform is and why an organization might want to build one, let's identify some key attributes that affect the success of a platform.

1. **Platform as a product**. A platform exists to serve the requirements of its users and it should be designed and evolved based on those requirements, similar to any other software products. Platforms should provide the necessary capabilities to support the most common use cases across product teams, and prioritize those over more specific capabilities that are only used by a single team to maximize the value delivered.

> 1. **User experience**. A platform should offer its capabilities through consistent interfaces and focus on the user experience. Platforms should endeavor to meet their users where they are, which may mean a combination of GUIs, APIs, command-line tools, IDEs, portals, and AI agents. For example, a platform typically offers the capability of deploying an application. Developers might consume such a capability via the IDE, testers might use a command-line tool, whereas a product owner might use a GUI-based web portal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **User experience**. A platform should offer its capabilities through consistent interfaces and focus on the user experience. Platforms should endeavor to meet their users where they are, acknowledging that users can be human or agentic, which means providing a combination of GUIs, APIs, command-line tools, IDEs, and portals. For example, developers might consume such a capability via the IDE, testers might use a command-line tool, whereas a product owner might use a GUI-based web portal.
```

1. **Optional and composable**. Platforms are intended to make product development more efficient, so they must not be an impediment. A platform should be composable and enable product teams to use only parts of its offerings. It should also enable product teams to provide and manage their own capabilities outside of the platform's offerings when necessary. For example, if a platform doesn't provide a graph database and it's required for a product, it should be possible for the product team to provision and operate a graph database themselves.
1. **Secure and compliant by default**. A platform should be secure by default and offer capabilities to ensure compliance and validation based on rules and standards defined by the organization.
Security, governance, and compliance requirements for the business should be baked into the platform, reducing users' cognitive burden while ensuring consistent enforcement.

## Attributes of platform teams

> Platform teams are responsible for the interfaces to and experiences with platform capabilities \- like Web portals, custom APIs, and golden paths.

Reviewer 2: Feels like this can be a bit confusing

```suggestion
Platform teams are responsible for the interfaces and user experience of platform capabilities \- like Web portals, custom APIs, and golden paths.
```

On one hand, platform teams work with those teams implementing infrastructure and supporting services to define consistent experiences; on the other, they work with product and user teams to gather feedback and ensure those experiences meet requirements.

Following are jobs a platform team should be responsible for:

1. Research platform user requirements and plan feature roadmap
1. Market, evangelize and advocate for the platform's proposed values

> 1. Manage and develop interfaces for using and observing capabilities and services, including portals, APIs, AI agents, documentation and templates, and CLI tools

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Manage and develop interfaces for using and observing capabilities and services, including portals, APIs, documentation and templates, and CLI tools
```

As such it's vital that platform teams partner with app teams and other users to prioritize, plan, implement and iterate on the platform's capabilities and user experiences.
Platform teams that release features and experiences without feedback or that rely on top-down mandates to achieve adoption are almost certain to find resistance and resentment from their users and miss a lot of the promised value.
To counter this, platform teams should include product managers from the start to share roadmaps, gather feedback and generally understand and represent the needs of platform users.

**Too much effort is spent on low-value solutions that are overfitted to early-adopters**

When creating a platform, choosing the right capabilities and experiences to enable first is crucial.
Capabilities that are frequently required and undifferentiated, like pipelines, databases and observability, may be a good place to start.
Platform teams may also choose to focus first on a limited number of engaged and skillful app teams, who can provide detailed feedback.

> While this is valuable for the platform development process, it is important to maintain a birds-eye view of how the platform should evolve, and manage the roadmap thoughtfully to avoid prioritizing solutions for very narrow use-cases.

Reviewer: Minor grammar fix: "bird's-eye" requires an apostrophe.

```suggestion
While this is valuable for the platform development process, it is important to maintain a bird's-eye view of how the platform should evolve, and manage the roadmap thoughtfully to avoid prioritizing solutions for very narrow use-cases.
```

It is important to focus the platform team's energy on the experience and capabilities that are unique to their specific business.
Ways to reduce load on the platform team include the following:

> 1. Seek to build the thinnest viable platform layer over implementations from managed providers

Reviewer 3: Adding ref: https://github.com/Cloud-Native-Platform-Engineering/cnpe-community/issues/83

In a nutshell, platforms bridge from underlying _capability providers_ to platform users like application developers; and in the process implement and enforce desired practices for security, performance, cost governance and consistent experience.
The following graphic illustrates the relationships between products, platforms, and capability providers.

> <img src="../assets/platform_components.png" width=600px />

Reviewer 3: I corrected this in the main branch

The following table is intended to help readers grasp each capability by loosely relating it to existing CNCF or CDF projects.

| Capability | Description | Example CNCF/CDF Projects |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |

> | Web portals for provisioning and observing capabilities | Publish documentation and service catalogs. Publish telemetry about systems and capabilities. | Backstage, Skooner, Ortelius |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Web portals for provisioning and observing capabilities | Publish documentation and service catalogs. Publish telemetry about systems and capabilities. | Backstage, Ortelius |
```

| APIs for automatically provisioning capabilities | Structured formats for automatically creating, updating, deleting and observing capabilities. | Kubernetes, Crossplane, Operator Framework, Helm, KubeVela |

> | Golden path templates and docs | Templated compositions of well-integrated code and capabilities for rapid project development. | ArtifactHub |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Golden path templates and docs | Templated compositions of well-integrated code and capabilities for rapid project development. | Artifact Hub |
```

| Automation for building and testing products | Automate build and test of digital products and services. | Tekton, Jenkins, Buildpacks, ko, Carvel |

> | Automation for delivering and verifying services | Automate and observe delivery of services. | Argo, Flux, Keptn, Flagger, OpenFeature |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Automation for delivering and verifying services | Automate and observe delivery of services. | Argo, Flux, Flagger, OpenFeature |
```

> | Development environments | Enable research and development of applications and systems. | Devfile, Nocalhost, Telepresence, DevSpace |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Development environments | Enable research and development of applications and systems. | Devfile, Telepresence, DevSpace |
```

| Application observability | Instrument applications, gather and analyze telemetry and publish info to stakeholders. | OpenTelemetry, Jaeger, Prometheus, Thanos, Fluentd, Grafana, OpenCost |

> | Infrastructure services | Run application code, connect application components and persist data for applications | Kubernetes, Kubevirt, Knative, WasmEdge, KEDA CNI, Istio, Cilium, Envoy, Linkerd, CoreDNS Rook, Longhorn, Etcd |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Infrastructure services | Run application code, connect application components and persist data for applications | Kubernetes, Kubevirt, Knative, WasmEdge, KEDA, Istio, Cilium, Envoy, Linkerd, CoreDNS, Rook, Longhorn, Etcd |
```

Reviewer 5: Is KEDA CNI a place where something is missing or should it just be KEDA?

Reviewer 4: Definitely not a CNI :D

| Data services | Persist structured data for applications | TiKV, Vitess, SchemaHero |
| Messaging and event services | Enable applications to communicate with each other asynchronously | Strimzi, NATS, gRPC, Knative, Dapr |

> | Identity and secret services | Ensure workloads have locators and secrets to use resources and capabilities. Enable services to identify themselves to other services | Keycloak, Dex, External Secrets, SPIFFE/SPIRE, Teller, cert-manager |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Identity and secret services | Ensure workloads have locators and secrets to use resources and capabilities. Enable services to identify themselves to other services | Keycloak, Dex, External Secrets, SPIFFE/SPIRE, cert-manager |
```

| Security services | Observe runtime behavior and report/remediate anomalies. Verify builds and artifacts don't contain vulnerabilities. Constrain activities on the platform per enterprise requirements; notify and/or remediate aberrations | Falco, In-toto, KubeArmor, OPA, Kyverno, Cloud Custodian |

> | Artifact storage | Store, publish and secure built artifacts for use in production. Cache and analyze third-party artifacts. Store source code. | ArtifactHub, Harbor, Distribution, Porter |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| Artifact storage | Store, publish and secure built artifacts for use in production. Cache and analyze third-party artifacts. Store source code. | Artifact Hub, Harbor, Distribution, Porter |
```
